---
title: Adulthood and Avoidance Inertia
date: 2022-04-05T17:02:51-07:00
draft: false
tags: life
---

There was an [article by Haley Nahman](https://haleynahman.substack.com/p/95-are-you-baby-a-litmus-test) linked on Hacker News the other day which I found insightful. Haley essentially framed the struggle of growing up as one where comfort can become avoidance, which can stunt one’s adulthood by keeping you in a state of emotional infancy ("being a baby"). This infancy leads to you underestimating not only yourself (e.g. the dinner party) but also your friends (e.g. the punk mosh), who you assume share this same avoidant behavior. In an emotional stage where avoidance is the default response (Don’t want to go into the dinner party alone? Then don’t! Don’t make a scene by leaving an uncomfortable situation.), action is viewed as uncomfortable. And once you get into the habit of avoiding uncomfortable things or changing the status quo, it only gets harder from there, as you get progressively less experience in doing so. 

This is an excellent view of the situation of growing up: making yourself do things. Making yourself be active and assert your wants, while also understanding others’ actions and wants. Just as you need to leave the dance floor, you can’t expect your friends to join you because they’re probably still having a good time.

I would like to propose a further division: one between the thoughts you anticipated and those you did not, because for me, it was actually the unanticipated thoughts which proved far more challenging to overcome. For example, everyone knows that going to the DMV sucks, but you have to do it. Because I was aware of this in advance from a young age when I first heard of the soul-crushing agony of the local Department of Motor Vehicles, when it was my turn to suffer, I did so easily, almost automatically. "This is just part of growing up," I thought.

Contrast that with the thoughts you didn’t *even know* you would have, like the desire to cancel plans day-of. While memes, friends, and apparently app pitch decks reinforce the idea that this is common, nobody knows growing up that cancelling plans is some universal guilty pleasure the same way people know that the DMV kinda sucks. Then again, we also have a strong cultural norm *against* cancelling plans, because it could be seen as rude, inconsiderate, or an indication you don’t really like this person all that much. There is some tension here between "people like cancelling things" and "people don’t like being cancelled on."

This uncertainty in the social protocol - I know I made plans, but I want to cancel, what is the appropriate thing here? - is far harder to gauge, and then the cultural reinforcement of "everyone likes cancelling plans" makes it all too easy to avoid. After all, doesn’t everyone sorta like it? Forcing yourself to remain active when there is no social consensus - sometimes people will be relieved you cancelled, other times they’ll be offended - is a key struggle of developing will-power in adulthood. By contrast, forcing yourself to schlep to the DMV, I find, is much easier because you already know that, although everyone hates it, everyone has to do it. There is no such compulsion for making arbitrary plans with friends. You have to remain steadfast against your own avoidance, and this is done through will-power. Rather than simply following established and clear social guidelines, an adult has the experience and empathy to balance their own actions with the actions of others. Just because I’m not "feeling" the party tonight doesn’t mean I can stand outside alone for twenty minutes. Just because I wanna leave the mosh pit doesn’t mean my friends will or should. Sometimes I need to force myself to go out, and other times it actually is better to stay home (although this is far more rare than the avoidant mind wants to believe). I find developing this insight and understanding of case-by-case social minutiae far more challenging.

And yet, there is also a certain voice - at least for me - which instinctively knows the "right thing" to do. "Of course you shouldn’t wait outside alone because you’re awkward," this voice says. "That would be weird." "It’s no big deal to leave the mosh pit if you’re feeling overwhelmed." "Just have one drink and see how you’re feeling." This is largely determined by your childhood socialization. If you had parents with an active social life, a large family, or lots of friends, then you probably have a greater awareness of future "have to do"s than someone with a smaller social circle. 

And unfortunately the very nature of this social discomfort makes it harder to practice and train your social resolve. It’s sort of similar to physically working out in that way: the more you do it, the easier it gets (until a certain point). However, this effect goes both ways. The more you assert yourself or work out, then not only does it get easier to do so in the future, but it also gets harder to avoid. Just as avoidance has a certain inertia, so does assertion.
