---
title: "Does Twitter invite outrage?"
subtitle: "Yes."
date: 2021-05-05T20:03:46-07:00
draft: false
---

Out of all the social media, it’s no secret that Twitter is where you’ll get “cancelled” for comparing _Raya and the Last Dragon_  to _Avatar: The Last Airbender_ (or similarly trivial infractions) by mobs of trigger-happy enragés. Of course, public outrage is certainly nothing new, much less the invention of Twitter. There are complex social, political, and intellectual roots to the various online discourses we see now, far too many to elaborate in one blog post. Perhaps even an entire volume would still fail to truly exhaust the origins, forms, and functions of discourse. Existing media - print, film, television - has a much longer role to play in riling up readers. Disclaimers aside, however, there is still something noticeably different about Twitter, both in the design and culture of the platform compared to other sites.

The most obvious starting point is the character limit. Whether it’s 140 or 280 doesn’t really matter. The point is that it’s far too small to support any substantial or nuanced discussion. To be fair, this was never the intention of Twitter. This was not social Wiki-media. Jack Dorsey chose the name itself because it meant “a short burst of inconsequential information,” “chirps from birds.” It was never meant to decide the fate of celebrities in the court of public opinion. Twitter started the same year Facebook opened up to public use. In 2006, it would be borderline out of touch with reality to suggest social media was going to someday be the main forum for cultural studies. The implications of this character limit is that the complex opinions and judgments Twitter has become known for have to be broken up into small chunks, each one standing alone from the others. Sure, they are linked together in a thread, but they are still viewed (and taken) separately. This makes it all too easy to pinpoint one exact sentence, perhaps taken out of context, in a larger discussion and reply, quote tweet, or otherwise interact with as if it’s representative of the entire thread. With articles, journals, or books, you read the piece in its entirety, or at least in order. It gives the author time to expand upon their argument, to consider alternative positions, and to embed these alternatives within the larger whole. With Twitter, however, each phrase has to be worded just right to be able to stand alone without giving someone the chance to misinterpret or take out of context. This turns out to be extremely important because it encourages being “right” in any and all instances about everything at once. One tweet that is poorly worded or surrounded by controversy can be screenshotted for future pillory. Even solutions like [threader.app](https://threader.app) which concatenates all the tweets in a given thread into one page don’t really fix the issue because those tweets are still written for Twitter itself. 

The limited space of tweets sort of begs the question “what are you supposed to tweet anyways?” With Facebook, it’s fairly clear: life updates. People use(d) Facebook to share new jobs, birthdays, and pictures of trips to the lake. Of course, there is plenty of emotional, political, and controversial content on Facebook, but it doesn’t have the reputation Twitter does of inviting “cancellation.” I think that has something to do with the “personal” nature of Facebook compared to the pseudo-anonymity of Twitter. On Facebook, it’s expected that you have a real picture of yourself with real information. Or else, what’s the point? On Twitter, however, it’s commonplace to see K-pop accounts hashing it out with anime avatars. There are entire accounts built around no real world identity but rather the content the account produces: meme accounts, [dril](https://twitter.com/dril), fandoms, etc. The lack of any real social circles prompts the most extreme content to “win” in the fight for user attention. The sort of “inconsequential information” Jack Dorsey imagined doesn’t fit within these boundaries. Life updates don’t drive engagement when you don’t have the offline relationships Facebook purports to build on. The pseudo-anonymity of Twitter favors entirely different kinds of content, content which instantly forms the groups that already exist in the less anonymous Facebook or real world. In the absence of knowing people from cycling, work, or high school, we know people based on their takes on abstract ideas, which we view as unchanging and fundamental to who they are as people. 

Next up is quote tweeting. A seemingly innocuous, even fun, feature, I think quote tweeting actively encourages a “pwning” mindset, focused on picking out specific missteps in someone’s tweet and literally framing them with commentary on top. Comparing it to other social media, there really isn’t an equivalent elsewhere. Even with Instagram where you can repost someone’s story, there isn’t incentive to criticize because one, it’s a visual medium and two, Instagram is much “slower” than Twitter. It’s rare to find more than several stories at once and when you do, it’s not natural for the platform. The UI makes you view and tap through each one or wait for the “timer” to expire. It doesn’t encourage heavy commentary or text-based dialogue. This of course is also a criticism of Instagram: that it’s visual emphasis encourages unrealistic view of life as a non-stop carousel of aesthetically pleasing snapshots and poses. Twitter’s textual emphasis encourages commentary and criticism. Quote tweeting is just the most obvious aspect of this overall design. 

I remember when Twitter was first introduced as something like a “global group chat.” I think a lot of the site actually supports this view. It’s also what drives the argument that Twitter should be a public utility, more so than Facebook or others. You can write quick messages instantly delivered around the world. You can reply, favorite, and repost these messages to notify your own followers. It’s well-suited to headlines, quick delivery of vital news, and public service alerts. A lot of this comes from Twitter’s roots as a kind of layer over regular text messaging. What a lot of people don’t remember, though, is that texting is literally SMS - **short** message service. It is not designed for long-form content or serious discussion like other media. Trying to discuss the ethics of eating the Impossible Burger over sustainability farmed livestock is like trying to watch a film frame by frame. It misses a lot of the nuance, expression, and personality that comes from motion, from flow, from the life of a real conversation. 

Quote tweeting, I’d argue, is one of the biggest things stopping Twitter from ever really approaching this public utility “global group chat” idea. It inherently reframes the original message from the eyes of the quoter. (Side note: I hate when people misuse “inherently” so I really mean it here.) Rather than read the original in its own context and then read the quote after, quote tweeting shoves the opinion first. Shoot first, talk later. 

Another unusual part of Twitter’s design is that replies are a “first-class” feature. Rather than relegated to the bottom like a footnote or traditional blog comments, Twitter shows replies as almost on equal footing as the original. A tweet is a tweet after all. There’s little distinction between “post” and “comment” like there is on other sites. Everybody’s voice has equal weight, both philosophically and visually. It’s an egalitarian dream which just happens to create a power vacuum. The replies are a virtual Coliseum where the victor determines the take of the original. This is known as “ratioing,” where a reply or quote tweet gets more engagement metrics (likes, retweets, etc.) than the original. It’s not all too different from the dynamics on, say, Reddit where the person consistently getting down-voted has lost the argument to the person consistently up-voted. Twitter just codified the feeling. The name is different, but it seems the 2009 pwning mentality is here to stay. There’s a rush of dopamine when you win an argument and that rush is even better when you have righteousness on your side. And on Twitter there’s no shortage of righteousness points. Likes, retweets, replies, mentions, followers, even views. Panem et engagement metrics. 

Twitter’s hypothetical “Edit Button” has been a hot topic for so long it’s basically guaranteed to never exist. It has advocates on both sides, some claiming it’s crucial to fix typos and others claiming it would ruin the “texting” feel of the site. I don’t have a prescriptive opinion on what Twitter _should_ do but I do have a descriptive one. The lack of an edit button only further contributes to the righteous “accountability” culture whereby what you say is forever held against you, on both a technical level (i.e. you can’t edit) and cultural (i.e. you will never be forgiven for your transgressions). It’s metaphorical almost. You are never allowed to revise or correct your opinions or statements. What you said is your take till the end of time and if you are criticized for it, even five or ten years later, that’s just being held accountable for your actions. There is no editing, there is no atonement, we all carry the original sin upon us and we will all surely be judged by the blue bird masses. Where I think the defense of no edit button falls short is that Twitter **isn’t** SMS. It carries a lot of the same characteristics - character limits, instant delivery, text-based, generally not serious (e.g. don’t break up with someone over text, don’t break bad news over text, etc.) - but it’s different in one key respect: publicity. Whereas a group chat is extremely limited (iMessage group chats are limited to 32 iMessage users), Twitter is _global_. The entire world is quite literally watching, and when it turns against you, it’s not just the people in your contact list. It’s job recruiters, potential partners, employers, stalkers, online extremists, and entire classes of people we would never usually interact with. This creates a real problem when someone raised in a one physical area, with unique culture, values, social norms, and history, starts to judge someone raised in an entirely different area. In real life, you get a pass. You can explain one-to-one if someone has an issue with what you’ve said. Or, if you’re close enough to discuss controversial issues, it’s likely you know where each other comes from, both physically and mentally. But on Twitter, one person can attack and then retreat, letting countless others dog-pile on the offender. It’s not possible to have a one-on-one, even through DMs because in the online realm, you cannot demand attention with your physical presence. You rely almost entirely on the other person’s grace to hear you out, which, I think it’s needless to say, is not how the internet operates. 

It sounds like I’m making quite the stacked case against Twitter, as though it alone is responsible for all evils and ills plaguing our world today. It is not. I have seen vicious online discourse since Tumblr circa 2012. 4chan is certainly a more repugnant and immediately off-putting site, the “cesspool of the internet,” and for good reason. But that does not mean Twitter is entirely good either. I do think it has contributed, the exact degree of which I am not sure, to our current culture of irredeemable cancellation; of a stifling and imposing set of rules made not in good faith, but as just another way to put ourselves above others (“they’re x-ist and I’m not”); of dangerously uncritical thinking and reading things in the worst light possible. It’s said that the average American today has fewer friends than they did years ago [^1] and I think that’s partially why we see less political action now than ever before. The idea that somehow the internet is going to change people’s political alignments is especially misguided to me. Despite the tomes, models, and majors made out of political science, politics is overwhelmingly a personal affiliation. It’s where and how you were raised, your identity and how the world views it, the people who have your back (theoretically) and those who don’t. Gay rights progressed hugely in the 90’s after the AIDS crisis not because of some sudden moral awakening but because a more accepting culture led to more people coming out and, consequently, more people having gay friends. It was not an issue that would have been solved arguing with people on Twitter. It was a personal issue, as politics often is. Profiting on outrage isn’t the way forward and I think Twitter, from its barest foundations, contributes to this problem.

So, what would a healthier Twitter look like? Well, I certainly don’t know or I would’ve pitched it! The idea that springs to mind is, arrogantly, this: a blog. Where you have space to express your opinions in full, without a thread of 1,200 tweets where one sentence out of context indicts of you human rights violations. But then again, like I said, I saw the 2012-Tumblr discourse which I see a lot of parallels to in modern Twitter, and Tumblr was a blogging site. Maybe it went wrong somewhere and we can try again and fix it. Or maybe it did everything it could, but the nature of social media sites - with “interaction” like reposting, liking, and replies - is naturally prone to fall to squabbling. I don’t know the answer, but I do know that Twitter is not it. 

[^1]: McPherson, Miller, Lynn Smith-Lovin, and Matthew E. Brashears. “Social Isolation in America: Changes in Core Discussion Networks over Two Decades.” American Sociological Review 71, no. 3 (June 2006): 353–75. https://doi.org/10.1177/000312240607100301.
