---
title: "Cryptocurrency: Too Developed to Fail?"
date: 2022-06-06T22:08:44-07:00
draft: false
tags: tech, cryptocurrency
---

There’s a lot of debate on whether cryptocurrency is froth supported by permissive economic policies during the pandemic or a revolutionary change on par with the internet. Personally, although I see a lot of technical merits in the field, I am discouraged by how the chips have fallen in the real world, concentrating a lot of power once again in the hands of the rich and shady; attracting flame wars online; and very often being reduced to a series of get rich quick schemes and scams with countless new random “tokens” being floated as the future weekly. If it was just YouTube videos explaining how drop-shipping will give you financial “freedom,” I would have no reservations writing off the entire world of cryptocurrency as a grift. 

However, what gives me pause is the entire industry that has developed around it, within institutions I seriously respect. Barbara Liskov has done recent work on blockchains, specifically cross-chain transactions. MIT’s [undergrad distributed systems course](https://web.archive.org/web/20220521154011/https://pdos.csail.mit.edu/6.824/schedule.html) covers not just Bitcoin, but smart contracts and - perhaps cheekily - a Solidity implementation of a casino. [arXiv](https://arxiv.org/list/cs.DC/recent) has new submissions of cryptocurrency research and systematizations of knowledge every day, coining terms just as valid and well-defined as other academic jargon. What happens to the countless GitHub organizations and repositories - HardHat, Truffle, Brownie, OpenZeppelin, Go Ethereum - if the crypto ecosystem goes under? 

Just as cryptocurrency itself touts and holds as self evident, it is the network that gives it its strength. You will notice that all of the examples cited are academic or software development related, which is due to my own biases. I am not persuaded by the Crypto Dot Com Arena purchase as much as I am by an MIT syllabus. Ultimately, what gives an idea its strength and persistence is a network - dependents, derivatives, copycats. *Twilight* was vastly more influential on the literature and film industries than *Avatar*, which we can see roughly by the number of copycats. Post-*Twilight* there was a huge influx of not only teen drama vampire novels with accompanying film adaptations, but young adult fiction in general ranging from *The Hunger Games* to *The Fault in Our Stars*, each trying to replicate the franchise’s enormous success. *Avatar*’s contributions were mostly in the technical space of 3D film and motion capture and, although motion capture underlies almost every single Disney blockbuster, 3D has amounted to little more than a gimmick. While I’m sure there are people out there who buy a ticket for 3D for every movie they see, by and large it has not taken hold as perhaps projected and regular, 2D vision (although in increasingly higher definition) remains the norm. 

By analogy, the cryptocurrency and Web3 spaces are just forming their networks now and it is these networks that will be true test of their potential. The more blockchain developer job postings I see, the more conferences and conventions I see, the more I have this feeling that surely crypto is here to stay and that its proponents and the venture capitalists betting on it are correct in it being the “new internet.” Then again, I have never lived through a bubble as an adult before. I did not experience the dot com bubble or the housing mania preceding the Great Financial Crisis. If nothing else, this is a learning experience. Any more, it is the future.