---
title: "Anthropic Villains"
date: 2022-02-20T16:47:16-08:00
draft: false
tags: film
---

In "The Dark Knight," the Joker represents chaos against the ordered corruption and salvation within Gotham. He is unlike either Batman or Falcone, each with their own agenda, each unto themselves. The Joker is a reaction to Gotham, which in turn, creates the conditions for a "Joker" figure to exist in the first place. If Gotham were less corrupt, there would be no pure idealogue seeking to expose its true nature. This is what I will call an "anthropic villain," one which exists in the world only because the world has allowed them to exist, intentionally or not. Like the anthropic principle, the answer to "how does the universe have all necessary conditions to support intelligent life?" is that if it did not, there would be no one to ask such a question in the first place. If the Mob did not exist, if the corrupt politicians did not exist, if the Batman did not exist to counter them, the Joker would have no power because he would nothing to work against. But it is not any one of these figures which creates the Joker. If the Batman did not exist, the Joker still may. Rather, it is the entire society surrounding him which creates the conditions necessary for his existence.

The anthropic villain is not merely a Shylock ("Thou call'dst me dog before thou hadst a cause; / But, since I am a dog, beware my fangs:"), that is someone turned evil by society's prejudice, but rather a force of evil entirely unto themselves which nevertheless would have no power to cause harm without their surroundings making it so. The earliest example I can think of is the Serpent in the Garden of Eden. The Serpent would not exist unless God created him, nor would he have any power unless Eve had listened to him. It is not as though the Serpent started out good and was corrupted by society, rather he *is* the corruption, the anarchy, the antimatter of the system. However, this does not mean the anthropic villain is Sauron either. Sauron existed already in a largely good and just world and his corruption of the elves and other races only went to serve his own quest for power. This is to say, Sauron was dangerous on his own. The Serpent did not strike Eve nor want anything else but the downfall of perfection. He did not want power as Sauron did.

I find this character interesting on a philosophical level, but doubt it has any true utility as a recognized trope. Merely, it interested me because these characters are almost "glitches" in the system which only exist because of the system in the first place and yet who seek its downfall.