---
title: "Percept Actuator Dissonance"
date: 2022-04-25T19:29:35-07:00
draft: false
tags: life
---

Many people when asked what they want to be most in life will say “happy.” A noble goal from the face of it and one repeated constantly in America as the end-all, be-all maxim, and yet almost everyone agrees that happiness itself is rather difficult to pin down. We are told to optimize for happiness but, really, there is no “happiness” metric to optimize for. In AI, this sort of input to a system which it uses to make decisions is called a “percept,” as in the robot perceives the distance to the nearest obstacle or the speed and orientation of its wheels. The subsequent actions are then performed by an “actuator” which brings the system closer to the ideal state. These can be things like motors, speakers, or wheels. For us humans, we combine our percepts for family time, number and quality of friendships, free time, money, roughly social status, and countless other metrics with our actuators like intelligence, social skills, and talents to try and reach some ideal configuration of states. The mistake comes when we collapse these myriad different metrics into one and label it “happiness.”

Another common one is “success.” What does it even mean to be “successful”? Of course decent compensation is a large part of it, but there are also things like the title you have, the people you work with and for, long-term options, and work life balance. Some people define success as being retired at 30 and able to pursue their own passions; some, having “VP” in their title at their dream company; others, as being your own boss. However, most of us don’t take any of this into account when we have those heart-sinking thoughts about wanting to be “successful.” While our percepts are tuned to specific, often-actionable items, our actuators work around the clock, mentally or physically, in the loosely-defined hopes of “success” as a specific good. Part of this is lack of practice in realizing the difference, but a more significant issue is that these specific, perceptible metrics are far from independent. Even though you may want to “be your own boss,” achieving that goal may require some unintuitive or even seemingly counterproductive actions, like working for someone else to gain a foothold in an industry. We cannot possibly begin to optimize for “success” until we define, to some degree of rigor, what we mean by it, which percepts we are going to value and in what weights relative to others.

